---
title: "The Power of Food"
date: 2018-02-18T16:17:03-07:00
draft: false
---

I recently taught a church activity about the 'The joy of feeding my family.'  I had a great time preparing for this as food is a great source of joy for me.  Food is powerful.  It nourishes, heals, connects, is enjoyed, is creative, connects us with nature, and effects emotion, which is both good and bad.  Once at the park with my kids, we were saying how funny it would be if fruit snack packs grew on trees.  As I thought about this I realized that they really do.  Oranges, for example, grow with a protective covering surrounding a sweet, nourishing delicious flesh already segmented and ready to eat.  Nothing man can manufacture could be so complex and nutritious.  We can mimic the macronutrients, but will always lack the thousands of health properties that natural foods contain.  It is no coincidence that fresh basil and tomatoes taste good together.  They work together to unlock the nutrients of the other, helping our bodies to maximize their nutrient availability.  I love the lists of foods that look like body parts they benefit- walnuts look like the brain, tomatoes- heart, carrots- eye, ginger- stomach, sweet potatoes- pancreas, etc.  God created so many things for our use.

We live in a day where food is a great source of stress and guilt.  There are endless studies on what we should and shouldn't eat.  Dietary restrictions and a desperation for thinness abound.  It would be better to look to past wisdom, wisdom of cultures, and the innate wisdom of the body when deciding what to eat rather than a study that can be as easily disproven as it is proven.  The first important question to ask when deciding how to nourish the body is 'why?' Is it weight loss, long life, more energy, hobby, health, healing?  In reality the answer to all of these are pretty much the same, but it's important to know our personal motivation.

Many turn eating into a religion of its own.  Feeling they are doing what's right by eating a certain way and losing sight of the purposes of food. Michael Pollan sums it up best, "Eat food, mostly plants, not too much."  If we all did this we wouldn't be on this endless search for the perfect diet and we wouldn't feel the need to make it a moral issue. An abstract from a study states:

_"Recent research has revealed that specific tastes can influence moral processing, with sweet tastes inducing prosocial behavior and disgusting tastes harshening moral judgments. Do similar effects apply to different food types (comfort foods, organic foods, etc.)? Although organic foods are often marketed with moral terms (e.g., Honest Tea, Purity Life, and Smart Balance), no research to date has investigated the extent to which exposure to organic foods influences moral judgments or behavior. After viewing a few organic foods, comfort foods, or control foods, participants who were exposed to organic foods volunteered significantly less time to help a needy stranger, and they judged moral transgressions significantly harsher than those who viewed nonorganic foods. These results suggest that exposure to organic foods may lead people to affirm their moral identities, which attenuates their desire to be altruistic."_ http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/1948550612447114

I think we've all met people who are out to preach their diet and are condescending to those who eat "inferiorly." It's no wonder it's uncomfortable to be around people who do this.

Orthorexia is a new term for this obsession with healthy eating. An explanation from the national eating disorders website states:

_"Those who have an “unhealthy obsession” with otherwise healthy eating may be suffering from “orthorexia nervosa,” a term which literally means “fixation on righteous eating.” Orthorexia starts out as an innocent attempt to eat more healthfully, but orthorexics become fixated on food quality and purity. They become consumed with what and how much to eat, and how to deal with “slip-ups.”  An iron-clad will is needed to maintain this rigid eating style. Every day is a chance to eat right, be “good,” rise above others in dietary prowess, and self-punish if temptation wins (usually through stricter eating, fasts and exercise). Self-esteem becomes wrapped up in the purity of orthorexics’ diet and they sometimes feel superior to others, especially in regard to food intake._

_Eventually food choices become so restrictive, in both variety and calories, that health suffers – an ironic twist for a person so completely dedicated to healthy eating.  Eventually, the obsession with healthy eating can crowd out other activities and interests, impair relationships, and become physically dangerous."_
https://www.nationaleatingdisorders.org/orthorexia-nervosa

I read a book called "Intuitive Eating" by Evelyn Tribole M.S. R.D. and Elyse Resch M.S. R.D. F.A.D.A. which addresses many of the reasons for disordered eating. When these underlying issues are overcome and a balanced diet is restored people naturally settle into a healthy weight, make better food choices, and have reduced blood pressure and cholesterol. For many, diets give them a sense of control.  They use diet as a coping mechanism for other emotional problems. I suffered with this early in my life. Fortunately I had parents who cued in to the problem early on and got treatment for me a before and full blown eating disorder developed, but I've had thought patterns of an anorexic for many years.  I feared that if I didn't give my self dietary restrictions and enjoyed my food that I would never stop eating. Mike has been a voice of reason in the matter leading me to sensible eating.  After some time of observing his sensible eating patterns I started to adopt them.  I found that if I didn't restrict certain foods from my diet and enjoyed what I was eating I was more satisfied and didn't feel the need to keep eating.  For years previous to this I had tried to lose five pounds and just couldn't get it off.  By getting rid of the diet mentality and enjoying food more I easily lost the weight.

Many fear not having dietary restrictions and believe that if their diet isn't hard to stick to it must not be healthy enough. I read an article that I really liked called "Indulgent Suffering" by LDS therapist Dr. Jennifer Finlayson-Fife. She has some great insights on why we self impose suffering and how it makes us feel good. This spreads into all aspects of life, feeling like if we are simply happy and enjoying life we must not be doing God's will because it isn't hard enough. She says:

_"It’s like we have this mental checklist. Is it inconvenient? Check. Is it opposite of what I want? Check. Is it going to require sacrifice? Check. Is it going to cause suffering? Check. Is it going to be hard? Check. Conclusion: This must be good, right, and God’s will."_
https://healthymeaningfulliving.com/2018/01/21/indulgent-suffering/ 

Life really isn't segmented into health, spirituality, social, etc every piece is part of a great whole. Striving and improving are different than suffering. We shouldn't suffer in our diets. We should enjoy them. Satisfaction is a big factor in health.

On studies done on lifespan, it has been proven over and over that the biggest factor in a long life is relationships.  How meaningfully are we connected to others?  One study states:

 _"Exercise and quitting smoking are thought to be important steps for a long, healthy life, but a new study suggests another potential tip for extending lifespan: make some friends._

_The results show people with strong social relationships increased their odds of survival over a certain time period by 50 percent, the researchers say. That's on par with ceasing smoking, and nearly twice as beneficial as physical activity in terms of decreasing your odds of dying early."_ 
livescience.com

The prophets and apostles of the LDS church are good examples of this.  They are old men who find enough strength and energy to labor diligently until the day they die, usually in their 90's.  They connect with meaning and purpose and this keeps them going.  They are not on obsessive diets and strict exercise regiments to keep them strong.  I also think about Mike's Aunt who has been on oxygen for the past 30 years and has severe osteoporosis.  She gets pneumonia regularly and falls and breaks hips, vertebrae, and ribs.  She is in her 90's and bounces back from all of these things.  She gets up and moves around even after painful breaks.  She has taken care of her family her whole life and continues to live happily and connected.

French food culture is my favorite to learn about.  The French always come out on top in regards to health- blood pressure, body composition, and low rates of heart disease, cancer, diabetes, etc.  They eat all real foods (not diet and processed foods) and have the highest consumption of dairy- cheese, butter, and heavy cream which is slammed in the U.S. How many people here are dairy free or believe they should be?  The French have great joy in food.  Meals are eaten slowly with family and friends.  They spend great amounts of time preparing, presenting, and eating wonderful meals. Kids in French daycares eat 3 course meals daily, carefully prepared by chefs. They don't feel guilty about enjoying a decadent dessert, and they don't eat 10 of them.  One of my favorite quotes about the French's attitude towards food.

_“He showed the words “chocolate cake” to a group of Americans and recorded their word associations. “Guilt” was the top response. If that strikes you as unexceptional, consider the response of French eaters to the same prompt: “celebration.”_
Michael Pollan

I was at dinner with some friends. One lady was on a strict diet.  She ate her third bland salad for the day, for the sake of "health," while the rest of us enjoyed roasted potatoes, fresh tomatoes, avocados, cheese, meat, and fresh fruit. A few of the items were on her forbidden list and she wasn't going to eat them, so for "health" she fed her body the same nutrients she had already given it.  When entire food groups are eliminated it increases mortality.  When only 2 food groups are eaten mortality rates increase by 50% in men and 40% in women.  They may enjoy temporary health benefits such as lower blood pressure or weight loss, but the toll it takes on nutrient loss over time is more detrimental.  Most of the time the benefits are temporary as extreme diets aren't sustainable- metabolism is harmed, nutrients are lost, the body has a harder time digesting normal foods,  and the body rebounds by taking on more weight and stress from frustration than it did before starting a strict diet.

The diet industry in the United States is a 90 billion dollar a year industry.  The result- declining health. There are increases in obesity, type 2 diabetes, heart disease, stress, etc.  There is also greater isolation in eating meals missing out on opportunities for connection.  Regular family dinners are a proven factor in long term health.  Michael Pollan says:

_“The shared meal elevates eating from a mechanical process of fueling the body to a ritual of family and community, from the mere animal biology to an act of culture.”_ 
In Defense of Food, An Eater's Manifesto

Food intolerances abound.  Some have serious intolerances such as celiac or a nut allergy, but other intolerances seem to ebb and flow.  After reading "Deep Nutrition" by Catherine Shanahan it made me wonder if what's really going on is a weakening of the body rather than the problem being with the food itself.  There are allergy therapies in which people who are allergic to peanuts are able to heal.  To start they are given micro amounts of peanuts and slowly increase their consumption.  They are training the body to digest rather than react to them.  It is a successful program and many are cured from this often life-threatening allergy.  Gluten intolerances could very well be the result of inflammation or other damage to the intestines making the body unable to digest gluten and not a problem with gluten in and of itself.  Doctrine and Covenants 89: 16 states:

_"All grain is good for the food of man; as also the fruit of the vine; that which yieldeth fruit, whether in the ground or above the ground."_

A better approach to food intolerances might be to heal the body to be able to digest.  Eliminating foods long term will lead to nutrition deficiencies and further weakening. It's interesting that we treat the digesive system so much differently than the rest of the body. We know that if we don't use our muscles or brain they will weaken. Imagine if we gave up every time we couldn't solve a math problem because it was hard or couldn't push past some fatigue in exercise. Similarly if we eliminate foods, especially healthy ones like nuts and grains, because of any minor discomfort we feel, our bodies will weaken not strengthen and lose the ability to digest them.

In college I came across an article by a medical doctor who had the FDA food guide pyramid side by side with his food guide pyramid. They were similar but his was more extreme. I thought it sounded healthier and asked my nutrition professor about it. I was shocked at the time with his response. He said,

_"Don't take advice from medical doctors they are often extremists when it comes to nutrition. They are educated on the body and experts in their specialties, but are not trained in nutrition. Look for a registered dietician for nutrition advice. They are well rounded and have a better understanding."_

Through the years I have found this to often be true. I had a doctor who prescribed a mega dose of vitamin D for me and recommended that my kids be on it too. I later asked our pediatrician about it and he guessed who my doctor was. Ironically it was his doctor too and he had recommended the  same for him. He said:

_"He's a great doctor, but I disagree with him on this. Time Magazine had an article about vitamin D which was later refuted, but many doctors took hold of it and started prescribing high doses of vitamin D to their patients. Megadoses disrupt proper function of other vitamins and other body processes. I don't recommend it for you and definitely not for your kids."_

There are many other doctors misusing their credentials to sell nutrition books, diet plans, and supplements. I have yet to come across extreme advice from a registered dietician.

As a nation we consume far too much corn.  This isn't to say that corn is bad.  Corn is healthy, but high quantities of corn is not. Corn is in our foods in the form of vegetable oil, corn syrup, and in our meats because that's what animals eat.  What nutrients are we missing out on because we are eating so much corn? If kale were the new corn that we put in everything, we would develop health problems by an overconsumption of kale. Variety and moderation are a much better cure than eliminating foods. In "An Omnivore's Dilemma" Michael Pollan says,

_“Very simply, we subsidize high-fructose corn syrup in this country, but not carrots. While the surgeon general is raising alarms over the epidemic of obesity, the president is signing farm bills designed to keep the river of cheap corn flowing, guaranteeing that the cheapest calories in the supermarket will continue to be the unhealthiest.” “So that's us: processed corn, walking.”_

As a society we settled into eating the same things over and  over. Growing up my vegetable intake consisted mostly of carrots, iceberg lettuce, and frozen corn and peas because that's what was available. There were a lot of nutrients we were missing out on. One good thing extreme diets have done for health is bring back foods that weren't so well known and available.  Information has abounded for years about macronutrients- carbohydrates, proteins, and fats as well as other well known vitamins and minerals- C, D, B vitamins, calcium, iron etc.  Until recently though I hadn't heard much about phytochemicals, health benefits of spices, fermented foods, etc.  I did know yogurt contained beneficial bacteria that was good for the gut, but I didn't realize the health benefits of fermented vegetables, vinegars, kefir, etc.  Spices were also something I overlooked thinking of them as flavor enhancers rather than sources of nutrients.  Some take this new information and go crazy with it.  If cinnamon is found to be good for you, suddenly they will add it to all their foods, take it in a pill, rub it on their skin, and buy it as an essential oil, at least until it goes our of fashion and it's on to the next health craze.  Wouldn't it be better to just include it more in a balanced diet?  Vegan cookbooks are a great source for learning new uses for nuts, beans, coconut oil etc.  I like to incorporate these things into what I'm preparing, but still add nutritious meats and cheeses for variety and health. Grocery stores today are stocked  with amazing produce- everything from fresh turmeric root, goji berries and wheat grass to bananas, avocados, and spinach. I like to keep adding good rather than finding foods to eliminate.

There is much joy and wonder in food. It is a gift from God.  He didn't create so many great things to taunt and tease us to see if we have the will power to avoid them.  He wants us to use them for health and enjoyment. When I get my produce basket for the week it is joyful to me. I see color, beauty, health, creativity, taste, nutrition, and possibility. Had I received a basket in my diet mentality days it would've been a thing of dread and obligation. Because fats and salt were on my forbidden list, I would've boiled the brussel sprouts and choked them down bland and soggy. Now I toss them with bacon, garlic, and kosher salt and roast them to perfection. They are a highlight of the meal rather than something to get through in order to get something better. I brought these brussel sprouts to a dinner I catered. They were the star. Many people came up to me asking for the recipe and saying, "I didn't know I liked brussel sprouts until today. They are delicious!"  Michael Pollan said it well:

_"Most people don’t want to learn to garden or hunt. But we can change the way we make and get our food so that it becomes food again—something that feeds our bodies and our souls. Imagine it: Every meal would connect us to the joy of living and the wonder of nature. Every meal would be like saying grace.”_

I would love if that quote could become reality once again.  If as a society we could rediscover the joy and importance of food, honor our bodies by properly nourishing them and have gratitude for the abundance God has given us.